Data science has multiple definitions. For this course we use the definition. 

Data science is the process of formulating a quantitative question that can be answered with data, collecting and cleaning the data, analyzing the data, and communicating the answer to the question to a relevant audience.

In general the data science process is iterative and the different components blend together a little bit. But for simplicity lets discretize the tasks into the following 7 steps. One, define the question you want to ask the data, two get the data, three clean the data, four explore the data, five fit statistical models, six communicate the results, and seven make your analysis reproducible

This course is focused on three of these steps. Step one, defining the question you want to ask, step four exploring the data and step five fitting statistical models to the data. We have seen in previous courses how to extract data from the web and from databases and we have seen how to clean it up and tidy the data. You also know how to use plots and graphs to visualize your data. You can think of this class as using those tools to start to answer questions using the tools you have learned in previous classes. 

We will look at a few different types of questions that you might want to answer from data. This flowchart gives some questions you can ask to figure out what type of question your analysis focuses on. Each type of question has different goals. There are four classes of question that we will focus on in this class. 

The goal of descriptive data science questions is to understand the components of a data set, describe what they are, and explain that description to others who might want to understand the data. This is the simplest type of data analysis. 

The goal of exploratory data science questions is to find unknown relationships between the different variables you have measured in your data set. Exploratory analysis is open ended and designed to find expected or unexpected relationships between different measurements. 

The goal of inferential data science questions is to is to use a small sample of data to say something about what would happen if we collected more data. Inferential questions come up because we want to understand the relationships between different variables but it is too expensive or difficult to collect data on every person or object. 

The goal of predictive data science question is to use data from a large collection to predict values for new individuals. This might be predicting what will happen in the future or predicting characteristics that are difficult to measure. Predictive data science is sometimes called machine learning. 

The questions we will focus on are the types where we look for relationships between measurements or variables. But in these types of analyses we won't be able to tell anything about what happens if you change one of the variables. To figure out what happens if you change a variable, you need a more advanced type of analysis. These analyses - causal and mechanistic - require data on specific types of problem and collected in special ways. For this class, the primary thing we need to be aware of is that just because two variables are correlated with each other it doesn't mean that changing one causes a change in the other. 

One way that people illustrate this idea is to look at data where two variables show a relationship, but are clearly not related to each other. For example, in a specific time range, the number of people who drown while falling into a pool is related to the number of films that Nicholas Cage appears in. These two variables are clearly unrelated to each other, but the data seems to show a relationship. We'll discuss more later in this class

Let's begin with some example data science projects, how they are asked, and how they are approached. In each example, we explain the problem as a data science question and guess what sort of analysis is fit for approaching the problem. If you have a credit card, every time you charge something, the bank keeps a record of that charge. This can be useful for you when you want to keep track of your finances. But banks use the information for other purposes as well. If you lose your credit card and someone starts using it to buy things for themselves this is called credit card fraud. By collecting data from everyone, credit card companies are able to predict potential fraudulent transactions before consumers notice anything. So the question is: "Can we predict which credit card charges are fraudulent?".  But this is not a data science question yet. To ask this like a data scientist we might ask, "Can we use the time of the charge, the location of the charge, and the price of the charge to predict whether that charge is fraudulent or not?". Since we are interested in predicting whether a charge is fraud or genuine, this will be a predictive analysis.

Any text you can find on the web can be considered to be data. You can use this data to understand how people behave on the web. For example, when companies like Youtube want to understand whether their users are behaving nicely or badly, they might look at the comments they leave. So the question might be, "Are the comments on our platform mostly nice or mostly mean?". To write this in terms of a data science question you might ask, "Are the words that people use in their comments more frequently positive words (great, awesome, nice, useful) or negative words (bad, stupid, lame, awful)?". This is a question you could answer by collecting information on words and labeling them with whether they are nice or mean. This is an example of descriptive analysis since once we have the data, the analysis boils down to comparing the number of positive comments to negative comments.

Sesame Street is a children's entertainment and educational program. Scientists might be interested in whether watching Sesame Street helps brain development in kids. To turn this into a data science question we need to make it more specific and focused on data. So we might convert this to a data science question like, "Can we compare children who watch Sesame Street and those who don't to see whose test scores are higher?" A complication is that it might be difficult and expensive to get parents to have their children participate in the study. So we might take a small sample of students and measure their test scores and find out whether they watch TV. Since we want to say something about all children, but have only measured data on a few, this would be an inferential analysis.  

The way to start a data analysis project is to start with a question. As we saw in the above examples, the questions should not start with the data. They should start with a general question that you want to start to answer. This approach is called "problem forward, not solution backward". After you have asked your general question, the next step is to turn it into a data science question. This usually involves making the question more concrete, identifying what type of question you are asking, and identifying the parts of the data that you will use to answer the question. We will cover how to convert general questions to data science questions in a future lesson. The next steps involve exploring and analyzing the data. The bulk of the rest of this course will focus on the tools you can use to analyze data and find summaries or relationships that answer the questions you ask when starting a data analysis.