Data science is the process of making senses of data. In this course we will learn the basics of data analysis.

A data science problem can be broken down into the following four-step process: the first step is to ask yourself what are the data science questions you define that can be answered with data; The second step is to find, get, and clean your data; The third step is to apply data analysis tools to your cleaned-up data to answer the data science questions you asked in the first step. The final step is to present and communicate your analysis results to your audience. We have already discussed what the second step (getting and cleaning data). In this course, we will discuss the first (asking questions) and the third steps (data analysis) and in a future course, we will go over how to communicate your analysis.

These are the categories of what data scientists usually refer to when it comes to different types of data science problems. The goal of descriptive data science questions is to describe large volumes data. The goal of exploratory data science questions is to find unknown relationships with many variables measured. The goal of inferential data science questions is to use a relatively small sample of data to say something about a bigger population. The goal of predictive data science question is to use data from some objects to predict values of other objects. We usually perform predictive analysis by splitting the same population into a training and test data set. The first step to approach a data science problem is to know what kind of question you're dealing with. The analysis used in each of the categories mentioned above can be different. In the coming course, we will learn how to ask a question and translate it to a data science question.