We have learned what data scientists call different types of data science problems. But you may be wondering to what categories the question in your mind belongs. Is it a prediction or inference? Does it only require a simple descriptive analysis?

To better understand this, let's start with the main three types of questions you may face. This list is inspired by Benjamin Bloom's famous Taxonomy. Most questions we face every day are typically one of these: What is the summary of what happened?, What happens to something as a result of something else?, and How can we predict something?

The first type is the question "What is the summary of what happened?" This kind of question is a more comprehensive version of the previous question. In this type of question, the analysis is at aggregate levels. So instead of looking at one specific case, we look at what happens on average. For instance, a question like what is the most used mode of transportation for most Americans? Or what is the average rainfall in Seattle? Or what is the divorce rate in New York City? In these types of questions, we don't usually go beyond using simple statistics such as mean, median, minimum, or maximum or need to look at the distribution of a variable simply.

Next is the question "What happens to something as a result of something else?" In this kind of data science questions, we are often interested in the relationship between two or more variables. In simple terms, we want to answer what happens to Y if X changes. Let' look at a question of this sort. A lot of us wonder if going to college is beneficial in our life. We want to know whether going to college increases our salary or not. This could be a data science question. We need to perform an analysis that shows the effect of X (going to college) on Y (earnings) for most people to be able to tell anything meaningful. Another question can be what is the effect of sitting under the sun and cancer. In general, these kinds of questions requires more complexed analysis.

Finally, the last question "How can we predict something?" Note that in this kind of questions, we are not looking at a specific X to explain Y. We are mainly interested to know how something happens? For instance, how can we predict prices movements of a specific stock? What are the factors that determine a successful student? What predicts a product to receive positive reviews on Amazon? Again we are not looking at a specific factor or factors that explain Y but instead we are interested in knowing how Y happens?

Try thinking about the questions that you face every day and see if you can put them under any of the categories mentioned above. For instance, should you take the bus or walk to destination today? What will the weather look like this weekend? Should you wear dress formally or casually in your next interview? What's the best time to go to the coffee shop in your neighborhood to avoid a long line? You can also think about a longer-term question such as: Is data science a good field to invest your time in? Is moving to Washington DC the right career decision?

Now that you know the type of your question, here's is how we can figure out what types of data science analysis is best to approach the problem. Most type 1 problems can be solved using descriptive analysis. Most type 2 problems can be solved using exploratory analysis or inferential analysis. And finally, most type 3 problems can be solved using predictive analysis. So for your next project as a data scientist, first try to write down your question in a short sentence, then figure out what type of question it is, and decide what types of data science analysis is the best method for your question.